Add Kedro Security Model documentation (#5499)
kedro-org/kedro: SECURITY_MODEL.md

# Kedro Security Model

This document describes Kedro's security model from the perspective of Kedro users. It is intended to help users understand Kedro's trust assumptions and make informed decisions about how to develop and deploy Kedro projects.

> If you would like to know how to report security vulnerabilities and how security reports are handled by the security team, see [Kedro's Security Policy](SECURITY.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to know how to report security vulnerabilities and how security reports are handled by the Kedro team, see [Kedro's Security Policy](SECURITY.md).
```

## Understanding Kedro's Security Model

**Kedro is a code authoring framework, not a web application.** Unlike multi-tenant web services where untrusted users interact through a UI or API, Kedro is a Python framework used to write and run data and AI workflows. This difference shapes what is and is not considered a security vulnerability.

> Kedro does not attempt to sandbox user-written pipeline code. A Kedro project runs as normal Python in the environment where it is deployed, with whatever permissions and access that environment provides.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I fully get what "to sandbox" means.

## User Types

Kedro's security model distinguishes between two user roles:

### Deployment Managers

> Deployment Managers are responsible for the environment where Kedro runs. They control infrastructure, deployment configuration, access controls, credentials management, and monitoring according to their organization's security requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deployment Managers are responsible for the environment where Kedro runs. They control infrastructure, deployment configuration, access controls, credentials management, and monitoring according to their organisation's security requirements.
```

> Kedro does not define or enforce those organizational controls. They must be implemented by the people and systems responsible for deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kedro does not define or enforce those organisational controls. They must be implemented by the people and systems responsible for deployment.
```

### Project Developers

Project Developers are responsible for writing pipeline code, custom datasets, hooks, plugins, and project configuration.

> In practice, this means that the person or system authoring a Kedro project is expected to write code that is safe and compliant with the organization's security policies. If your organization uses agents or other automation to generate project code, the same expectation applies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, this means that the person or system authoring a Kedro project is expected to write code that is safe and compliant with the organisation's security policies. If your organisation uses agents or other automation to generate project code, the same expectation applies.
```

## Core security principle: Code vs data

The main security boundary in Kedro is the distinction between **code** and **data**.

### The golden rule

```

> ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐

Reviewer 2: (nit) This can be an admonition instead of a random code block

│  CODE = RESPONSIBILITY                                 │
│  DATA BECOMING CODE = VULNERABILITY                    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

In this context:

- **Code** means logic intentionally authored to be executed as part of a Kedro project. This includes project Python files, custom datasets, hooks, plugins, and any other code written by the Project Developer.

> - **Data** means inputs that are meant to configure or feed that code, not define new executable behavior. This includes YAML configuration files such as `catalog.yml`, `parameters.yml`, and `logging.yml`, runtime parameters, and dataset contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data** means inputs that are meant to configure or feed that code, not define new executable behaviour. This includes YAML configuration files such as `catalog.yml`, `parameters.yml`, and `logging.yml`, runtime parameters, and dataset contents.
```

> - **Data** means inputs that are meant to configure or feed that code, not define new executable behaviour. This includes YAML configuration files such as `catalog.yml`, `parameters.yml`, and `logging.yml`, runtime parameters, and dataset contents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Data** means inputs that are intended to configure or feed that code, rather than define new executable behaviour. This includes YAML configuration files such as `catalog.yml`, `parameters.yml`, and `logging.yml`, runtime parameters, and dataset contents.
```

This distinction matters because Kedro has different responsibilities for each:

- **User-authored project code is the Project Developer's responsibility.** Kedro does not review or constrain the logic written inside a user's project.
- **Official code shipped by Kedro is Kedro's responsibility.** If framework code distributed by Kedro handles inputs unsafely or creates unintended execution paths, that may be a security vulnerability in Kedro.

> - **Data should remain data.** If configuration or dataset contents can trigger unintended code execution through Kedro's framework behavior, that is a security vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data should remain data.** If configuration or dataset contents can trigger unintended code execution through Kedro's framework behaviour, that is a security vulnerability.
```

> - **Data should remain data.** If configuration or dataset contents can trigger unintended code execution through Kedro's framework behaviour, that is a security vulnerability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Data should remain data.** If configuration files or dataset contents can trigger unintended code execution through Kedro's framework behaviour, that constitutes a security vulnerability.
```

### Example: Project Code Doing Something Unsafe

```python
# nodes.py
def process_data(params: dict):
    import subprocess

    subprocess.run(params["command"], shell=True)
```

This is not a Kedro vulnerability. The Project Developer explicitly wrote the code and is responsible for validating any inputs it uses.

### Example: Configuration Turning Into Code Execution

```yaml
# logging.yml
handlers:
  unsafe:
    class: subprocess.Popen
    args: ["rm", "-rf", "/"]
```

> This is a Kedro vulnerability if Kedro allows it to execute through normal configuration loading. In this example, the user intended to provide configuration data, not executable behavior.

Reviewer: I still feel like this might be interpreted wrong and someone thinking that this vulnerability actually exists in Kedro.. Not sure how we can make this clear without making it sound like this is a problematic feature in Kedro 🤔

> ## What Counts as a Security Vulnerability in Kedro

Reviewer: I'd like to hear @Joseph-Perkins 's thoughts on this section. Personally, I'd leave it out to not cause any confusion.

The following are examples of issues that should be treated as security vulnerabilities in Kedro itself and reported through [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md):

### Arbitrary code execution from configuration or other data

If YAML, JSON, parameters, dataset metadata, or other data inputs can cause arbitrary code execution beyond their documented purpose, that is a vulnerability.

### Unsafe deserialisation

If Kedro loads configuration or other user-controlled data using unsafe deserialisation mechanisms that allow execution of arbitrary Python objects, that is a vulnerability.

### Validation bypasses in framework-controlled extension points

If Kedro is supposed to restrict a value to a safe set of classes, modules, paths, or behaviours and those restrictions can be bypassed, that is a vulnerability.

### Credential exposure caused by framework behaviour

> If Kedro logs, serializes, prints, or otherwise exposes secrets through framework behaviour without the Project Developer explicitly doing so, that is a vulnerability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If Kedro logs, serializes, prints, or otherwise exposes secrets through framework behaviour without the Project Developer explicitly causing that exposure, that constitutes a vulnerability.
```

## Responsibilities of Deployment Managers

Deployment Managers are responsible for securing the environment around Kedro. Depending on the deployment, that typically includes:

- Protecting infrastructure such as servers, containers, and cloud resources
- Applying network controls such as firewalls, VPC configuration, and TLS
- Restricting access to environments, data, and credentials
- Managing secrets securely
- Monitoring and auditing deployments
- Applying runtime limits and isolation where required

> If an organization needs stronger isolation between project authors and runtime environments, that isolation must be implemented at the infrastructure or deployment layer, not assumed from Kedro itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an organisation needs stronger isolation between project authors and runtime environments, that isolation must be implemented at the infrastructure or deployment layer, not assumed from Kedro itself.
```

## Responsibilities of Project Developers

Project Developers are responsible for the safety of the code they add to a Kedro project. That typically includes:

> - Validating and sanitizing inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validating and sanitising inputs
```

- Following secure coding practices
- Managing dependencies responsibly
- Avoiding disclosure of secrets in code or logs

> - Ensuring project code complies with organizational security requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensuring project code complies with organisational security requirements
```

## Reporting Security Vulnerabilities

Please see [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) for information on how to report security vulnerabilities.

When reporting a potential vulnerability, it helps to explain:

- Whether the issue is in Kedro's framework code or in user-authored project code
- Which input is treated as code, or can unexpectedly become code
- The impact of the issue
- A minimal proof of concept

## Summary

> Kedro assumes that the people or systems authoring project code are trusted to write safe code that follows their organization's security policies. Kedro's responsibility is to ensure that the framework code it ships handles data safely and does not turn configuration or other inputs into unintended code execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kedro assumes that the people or systems authoring project code are trusted to write safe code that follows their organisation's security policies. Kedro's responsibility is to ensure that the framework code it ships handles data safely and does not turn configuration or other inputs into unintended code execution.
```

If you are unsure whether something is a Kedro vulnerability, ask:

> 1. Is the behavior coming from Kedro's own framework code, or from user-authored project code?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Is the behaviour coming from Kedro's own framework code, or from user-authored project code?
```

> 2. Is an input that should be treated as data being interpreted as executable behavior?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Is an input that should be treated as data being interpreted as executable behaviour?
```

> 2. Is an input that should be treated as data being interpreted as executable behaviour?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Is an input that should be treated as data being interpreted as executable behaviour instead?
```

# Kedro Security Model

This document describes Kedro's security model from the perspective of Kedro users. It is intended to help users understand the security model and make informed decisions about how to deploy and manage Kedro projects.

If you would like to know how to report security vulnerabilities and how security reports are handled by the security team, head to [Kedro's Security Policy](SECURITY.md).

## Understanding Kedro's Security Model

> **Kedro is a code authoring platform, not a web application.** Unlike multi-tenant web services where untrusted users interact through a UI or API, Kedro is a framework where developers write Python code that executes with full privileges. This fundamental difference shapes what is and isn't considered a security vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Kedro is a code authoring framework, not a web application.** Unlike multi-tenant web services where untrusted users interact through a UI or API, Kedro is a framework where developers write Python code that executes with full privileges. This fundamental difference shapes what is and isn't considered a security vulnerability.
```

## User Types

Kedro has two types of users with different capabilities:

### Deployment Managers

> Responsible for deploying Kedro projects to production environments. They have full system access and control infrastructure, credentials, secrets, and deployment configurations.

Reviewer: "They have full system access" - I think this is a bit more nuanced, we assume that who/what is deploying a Kedro pipeline has infrastructure access that is controlled by the organisation. As in, Kedro doesn't play any role here in defining access, that's up to the sys admin to regulate.

### Project Developers

> Responsible for writing pipeline code and configuration files. **Project Developers write Python code that executes with the full privileges of the Kedro process.** This means they can import any module, access any file, read environment variables, and execute system commands.

Reviewer: "Python code that executes with the full privileges of the Kedro process." 

I don't quite understand what this means.

> **Critical trust assumption**: Project Developers are trusted users. If you cannot trust your Project Developers, implement code review, static analysis, and deployment approval processes at the organizational level.

Reviewer: I kind of get what this paragraph is trying to say, but if this is written for Kedro users this sounds a bit strange. I'd assume we write this for the typical Kedro user so in that sense they are the Project Developers. Maybe rephrase a bit to make it clear that there's an assumption here that whoever (or what if using agents) is writing a Kedro pipeline, knows how to write safe code that adheres to the organisation's security policy.

## Core Security Principle: Code vs Data

Kedro's security model distinguishes between code and data:

### The Golden Rule

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  CODE = RESPONSIBILITY                                   │
│  DATA BECOMING CODE = VULNERABILITY                      │

> └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

Reviewer: Maybe here it makes sense to explain a bit more that "code" here is whatever the user writes, so something that is not part of the Kedro codebase (e.g. it's not what you get from installing Kedro) whereas data handling is managed by Kedro/kedro-datasets and so it's our responsibility that it's done securely. We have control over what we ship under the kedro packages, but not whatever code a user writes inside their Kedro project.

Author: thanks, over here data also doesnt mean just datasets it also means configurations. which to me wasn't very clear when i intiitally read it to but wanted to get another opinon

**Why not a vulnerability**: The person running `kedro` commands is a trusted Project Developer with file system access.

### 6. Denial of Service from Inefficient Code

Project Developers can write resource-intensive or infinite-loop code.

**Why not a vulnerability**: This is a code quality issue, not a security issue. Organizations should use code review and infrastructure-level resource limits.

### 7. Automated Security Scanner Findings

Automated security scanner reports (including AI tools) that flag patterns without understanding Kedro's trust model are not valid vulnerability reports.

**Common false positives**:
- "Path traversal in CLI parameters" → Project Developers are trusted
- "Unvalidated session_id" → Only settable by Project Developers
- "Arbitrary code execution via --runner" → Project Developers already have code execution
- "Developers can import any module" → This is Python; developers are trusted

**Kedro is not a web application**. Patterns that indicate vulnerabilities in web apps (untrusted user input, path traversal, code injection) are often normal in code authoring platforms where developers write and execute code.

> ## What IS Considered a Security Vulnerability

Reviewer: I'm not super sure we should add this paragraph... people might confuse this as actually existing vulnerabilities in Kedro.. perhaps this part should just describe how people should report vulnerabilities if they think they found one.

Author: Yeah, maybe I can remove this part for now; the LLM took inspiration from airflow and they have this bits so it added, but i was also unsure about keeping it.
